Add blog post: Generating a Pulumi Provider from an OpenAPI Spec (#19337)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/generating-a-pulumi-provider-from-an-openapi-spec/index.md

Most of that metadata is auto-derived by a scaffolder, but the editorial layer, including resource descriptions, examples, and the v0 aliases that make migration safe, stays handmade. Any human override is pinned across regeneration so a future spec change can't quietly override it. The language SDKs are still generated against the runtime schema, so new fields and enum values reach typed SDKs in all five languages the moment the spec ships.

## What the api namespace covers

The `api` namespace already spans most of Pulumi Cloud's resource model.

For resources that have an ancestor under `pulumiservice:index:*`, the mapping lives in [`docs/v0-api-coverage.md`](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-pulumiservice/blob/main/docs/v0-api-coverage.md). That file is auto-generated, so it stays in sync. Each `api/*` resource ships hand-maintained per-language examples in TypeScript, Python, Go, C#, Java, and YAML.

## What to know before adopting the preview

> The pulumiservice:api:* resource surface is in preview. Resource shape and module layout may change before GA.

> **The existing `pulumiservice:index:*` resources remain supported.** They are not being deprecated as part of v1.0 and continue to be supported. Migration to `api/*` is opt-in via Pulumi `aliases`. There is no implicit v0 to api, by design.

Reviewer: "There is no implicit v0 to api, by design."

What does that mean?

Author: The idea was more to show that we wanted to keep them as two seperate resources, but I will remove that line as it's weird

## Try it

> If you want to take the preview for a spin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to take the expanded provider for a spin:
```

---
title: "Generating a Pulumi Provider from an OpenAPI Spec"
date: 2026-05-21
draft: false
meta_desc: "Pulumi Service Provider v1.0 generates its pulumiservice:api/* surface from Pulumi Cloud's OpenAPI spec at runtime, so new features land without provider PRs."
meta_image: meta.png
feature_image: feature.png
authors:
    - luke-ward
tags:
    - pulumi-service
    - pulumi-cloud
schema_type: auto

# Social media copy is auto-posted to X, LinkedIn, and Bluesky when merged to master.
# Character limits: X ~280, Bluesky 300, LinkedIn 3000. Leave blank to skip a platform.
social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:
    bluesky:
---

The Pulumi Service Provider's new `pulumiservice:api/*` resource surface is generated directly from Pulumi Cloud's OpenAPI spec at runtime.

> This is the v1.0 release of the Pulumi Service Provider, and several new Pulumi Cloud capabilities land in the provider at the same time: fine-grained RBAC as code, stack config as a managed resource, Pulumi IDP as code, and audit-log export as IaC. The `api` namespace is in preview, and the legacy `pulumiservice:index:*` resources continue to be the production-supported path.

Reviewer 2: Can we not call it legacy? From the thread in slack, it felt like we would keep something similar to the current "index" resources for at least the forseeable future, and legacy makes it sound like we're going to be getting rid of it

<!--more-->

## Why this matters for users

Historically, every new Pulumi Cloud feature implied a follow-up PR in the provider before that feature could be used from a Pulumi program. The provider was always slightly behind the API it wrapped, and entirely new capability areas could take months to land.

The `api/*` surface changes both timelines. Because the schema is derived from the OpenAPI spec at runtime:

> 1. Whole new resource families land in the provider the same release they reach Pulumi Cloud. v1.0 shipped fine-grained RBAC, stack config, Pulumi IDP catalog management, and audit-log exports as managed resources with no bespoke provider code.

Reviewer: What is a StackConfig resource? Does it actually make sense to have as a resource?

1. New fields, features, and enum values on existing resources show up across all five language SDKs the moment they appear in the spec.

> 1. Field renames in the upstream API flow through cleanly, with no per-rename PR required in the provider.

Reviewer: What are field renames in the upstream API? That sounds like breaking changes and like we're saying "Now, breaking changes flow cleanly through to the user without any intervention"

Author: Weird that AI called this out, but i think there were some pre-prod API routes leaking through here.

## What's new in v1.0

v1.0 lifts whole capability areas of Pulumi Cloud into the `api/*` surface, not just incremental field additions. None of it required bespoke provider code.

> 1. **Fine-grained RBAC as code.** Custom roles, organization membership, and team role assignments are now managed resources. Helper data sources like `buildAllowPermissions`, `buildEnvironmentScopedPermissions`, and `buildStackScopedPermissions` build permission descriptors for the common grant patterns, so you skip the raw JSON. The full descriptor grammar is still available for complex cases, and roles authored in the Pulumi Cloud UI can be `pulumi import`ed cleanly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Fine-grained RBAC as code.** Custom roles, organization membership, and team role assignments are now managed resources. Provider functions like `buildAllowPermissions`, `buildEnvironmentScopedPermissions`, and `buildStackScopedPermissions` build permission descriptors for the common grant patterns, so you skip the raw JSON. The full descriptor grammar is still available for complex cases, and roles authored in the Pulumi Cloud UI can be `pulumi import`ed cleanly.
```

we don't have data sources

> 1. **Stack config as a managed resource.** `stacks:Config` lets you declare stack configuration values directly in a Pulumi program, closing a gap where stack config used to live outside IaC. Existing config can be adopted via `pulumi import`.

Reviewer: I really don't know about this one. Is there an example of how this would be used?

Author: Unsure of great usecases, but this is basically a resource that implements `pulumi config set`.

Author: I'll cut it from this post

> 1. **Pulumi IDP as code.** `services:Service` makes the [Pulumi IDP](/docs/idp/) catalog manageable from your Pulumi programs, surfaced the same release IDP ships in Pulumi Cloud. Platform teams can publish service definitions as code rather than only through the IDP console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Pulumi IDP as code.** `services:Service` makes the [Pulumi IDP](/docs/idp/) catalog manageable from your Pulumi programs. Platform teams can publish service definitions as code rather than only through the IDP console.
```

IDP shipped over a year ago

1. **Audit-log export as IaC.** `AuditLogExportConfiguration` brings audit-log export sinks under Pulumi management with a real destroy path. Compliance plumbing now lives next to the rest of your IaC instead of in click-ops runbooks.

> The pattern isn't "we stay aligned on fields." It's that whole capability areas of Pulumi Cloud reach the provider the same release they reach the platform, with no per-feature provider code written.

Reviewer: This reads like heavy AI slop

## How it works

> The Pulumi Service Provider embeds Pulumi Cloud's OpenAPI 3 document, available at <https://api.pulumi.com/api/openapi/pulumi-spec.json>. At startup, the provider parses the spec together with a small companion metadata file. The metadata file captures the Pulumi-specific semantics that an OpenAPI document can't express on its own: which endpoints pair up to form a single resource, what a resource's composite ID looks like, which response fields are secrets that arrive exactly once at create time, and so on.

Reviewer 2: "At startup" - is that startup of the provider, or when we start building the new version of the provider?

If the former, that sounds like the user has to download the spec whenever they run `pulumi up`

Most of that metadata is auto-derived by a scaffolder that runs as part of `go generate`. Existing values are preserved as pins, so when a heuristic would suggest something different, the human override stays in place and the tool logs an `INFO` to keep the override visible. What stays hand-curated is the editorial layer: resource descriptions, examples, v0 aliases, and explicit exclusions.

The language SDKs are still generated (Pulumi requires typed SDKs per language), but they are built against the runtime-emitted schema rather than against hand-written Go code. No resource Go file is written to disk for the `api/*` surface.

> Two CI workflows tie a spec refresh to a release tag. A manually-triggered refresh workflow pulls the latest spec, regenerates the SDKs, and opens a labeled PR. When that PR merges, a tag workflow pushes the corresponding release tag and the standard release pipeline takes over. End to end, one button click moves a spec change through to published packages and registry docs.

Reviewer: Not a lot of customer-facing value in this section. Happy for us to talk about how it works, but lets actually surface information that is valuable for the end-user.

Author: I had an idea of having a brief more "technical" lower level section, but I'll simplify this down into something that provides real info.

## What the api namespace covers

The `api` namespace already spans most of Pulumi Cloud's resource model.

For resources that have an ancestor under `pulumiservice:index:*`, the mapping lives in [`docs/v0-api-coverage.md`](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-pulumiservice/blob/main/docs/v0-api-coverage.md). That file is auto-generated, so it stays in sync. Each `api/*` resource ships hand-maintained per-language examples in TypeScript, Python, Go, C#, Java, and YAML.

## What to know before adopting the preview

> > The pulumiservice:api:* resource surface is in preview. Resource shape and module layout may change before GA; not yet recommended for production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The pulumiservice:api:* resource surface is in preview. Resource shape and module layout may change before GA.
```

Two things worth being explicit about:

> 1. **The legacy `pulumiservice:index:*` resources remain supported.** They are not being deprecated as part of v1.0 and continue to be the production-supported path during preview. Migration to `api/*` is opt-in via Pulumi `aliases`. There is no implicit v0 → api aliasing, by design.

Reviewer 2: Again, let's not call it legacy

> 1. **The existing `pulumiservice:index:*` resources remain supported.** They are not being deprecated as part of v1.0 and continue to be the production-supported path during preview. Migration to `api/*` is opt-in via Pulumi `aliases`. There is no implicit v0 → api aliasing, by design.

Reviewer: De-emphasize that the old resources are "production-supported". We don't want to scare folks away from trying the new thing.

> 1. **Pulumi-resource semantics still live in the metadata, not in the spec.** Composite IDs, secret outputs that arrive once, replace-vs-update behavior, and exclusions are hand-curated. The point of generation-from-spec isn't that the provider writes itself; it's that the provider can't silently fall behind on a field rename or a new feature flag the spec already describes.

Reviewer: Cut this - it's a lot of inside baseball that says nothing of value to the user.

---
title: "Generating a Pulumi Provider from an OpenAPI Spec"
date: 2026-05-27
draft: false
meta_desc: "Pulumi Service Provider v1.0 generates its pulumiservice:api/* surface from Pulumi Cloud's OpenAPI spec at runtime, so new features land without provider PRs."
meta_image: meta.png
feature_image: feature.png
authors:
    - luke-ward
tags:
    - pulumi-service
    - pulumi-cloud
schema_type: auto

# Social media copy is auto-posted to X, LinkedIn, and Bluesky when merged to master.
# Character limits: X ~280, Bluesky 300, LinkedIn 3000. Leave blank to skip a platform.
social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:
    bluesky:
---

The Pulumi Service Provider's new `pulumiservice:api/*` resource surface is generated directly from Pulumi Cloud's OpenAPI spec at runtime.

> This is the v1.0 release of the Pulumi Service Provider, and several new Pulumi Cloud capabilities land in the provider at the same time: fine-grained RBAC as code, Pulumi IDP as code, and audit-log export as IaC. The `api` namespace is in preview, and the existing `pulumiservice:index:*` resources continue to be the production-supported path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, we are announcing v1.0 of the Pulumi Service Provider: a major milestone in managing Pulumi Cloud with Pulumi itself. The provider is now generated directly from the Pulumi Cloud OpenAPI specification, unlocking a dramatically expanded pulumiservice:api/* resource surface and enabling Pulumi Cloud capabilities to become available in the provider faster than ever before.

This release also brings several major new capabilities to infrastructure as code, including fine-grained RBAC as code, Pulumi IDP as code, and audit log export as IaC. Together, these changes make the Pulumi Service Provider the most powerful and extensible way yet to manage and automate your Pulumi Cloud infrastructure.
```

1. Whole new resource families land in the provider the same release they reach Pulumi Cloud.
1. New fields, features, and enum values on existing resources show up across all five language SDKs the soon after they appear in the spec.

## What's new in v1.0

v1.0 lifts whole capability areas of Pulumi Cloud into the `api/*` surface, not just incremental field additions. None of it required bespoke provider code.

1. **Fine-grained RBAC as code.** Custom roles, organization membership, and team role assignments are now managed resources. For example, defining a read-only role and assigning it to a team:

    ```typescript
    const readOnly = new ps.api.Role("readOnly", {
        orgName: "acme",
        name: "stack-reader",
        description: "Read-only access to stacks across the org.",
        uxPurpose: "role",
        details: {
            __type: "PermissionDescriptorAllow",
            permissions: ["stack:read", "stack:list"],
        },
    });

    new ps.api.teams.Role("readOnlyForPlatform", {
        orgName: "acme",
        teamName: "platform",
        roleId: readOnly.roleId,
    });

>     ```

Reviewer: Can we rewrite this using the code-chooser so it's in every pulumi-supported language?

Reviewer: Here's an example of the code chooser: https://github.com/pulumi/docs/blob/master/content/blog/announcing-enum-support/index.md?plain=1#L27-L92
